Fantasy Football For Dummies®
Published by
Wiley Publishing, Inc.
111 River St.
Hoboken, NJ 07030-5774
www.wiley.com
Copyright © 2022 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc., Hoboken,
New Jersey
Published by Wiley Publishing, Inc., Indianapolis, Indiana
Published simultaneously in Canada
No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in
a retrieval system, or transmitted in any form or by any
means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording,
scanning, or otherwise, except as permitted under
Sections 107 or 108 of the 1976 United States Copyright
Act, without either the prior written permission of the
Publisher, or authorization through payment of the
appropriate per-copy fee to the Copyright Clearance
Center, 222 Rosewood Drive, Danvers, MA 01923, 978-
750-8400, fax 978-646-8600. Requests to the Publisher
for permission should be addressed to the Legal
Department, Wiley Publishing, Inc., 10475 Crosspoint
Blvd., Indianapolis, IN 46256, 317-572-3447, fax 317-
572-4355, or online at http://www.wiley.com/go/permissions.
Trademarks: Wiley, the Wiley Publishing logo, For
Dummies, the Dummies Man logo, A Reference for the
Rest of Us!, The Dummies Way, Dummies Daily, The Fun
and Easy Way, Dummies.com and related trade dress are
trademarks or registered trademarks of John Wiley &
Sons, Inc. and/or its aﬀiliates in the United States and
other countries, and may not be used without written
permission. All other trademarks are the property of
their respective owners. Wiley Publishing, Inc., is not
associated with any product or vendor mentioned in this
book.
LIMIT OF LIABILITY/DISCLAIMER OF WARRANTY:
WHILE THE PUBLISHER AND AUTHORS HAVE USED
THEIR BEST EFFORTS IN PREPARING THIS WORK,
THEY MAKE NO REPRESENTATIONS OR
WARRANTIES WITH RESPECT TO THE ACCURACY OR
COMPLETENESS OF THE CONTENTS OF THIS WORK
AND SPECIFICALLY DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES,
INCLUDING WITHOUT LIMITATION ANY IMPLIED
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS
FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE. NO WARRANTY MAY
BE CREATED OR EXTENDED BY SALES
REPRESENTATIVES, WRITTEN SALES MATERIALS OR
PROMOTIONAL STATEMENTS FOR THIS WORK. THE
FACT THAT AN ORGANIZATION, WEBSITE, OR
PRODUCT IS REFERRED TO IN THIS WORK AS A
CITATION AND/OR POTENTIAL SOURCE OF FURTHER
INFORMATION DOES NOT MEAN THAT THE
PUBLISHER AND AUTHORS ENDORSE THE
INFORMATION OR SERVICES THE ORGANIZATION,
WEBSITE, OR PRODUCT MAY PROVIDE OR
RECOMMENDATIONS IT MAY MAKE. THIS WORK IS
SOLD WITH THE UNDERSTANDING THAT THE
PUBLISHER IS NOT ENGAGED IN RENDERING
PROFESSIONAL SERVICES. THE ADVICE AND
STRATEGIES CONTAINED HEREIN MAY NOT BE
SUITABLE FOR YOUR SITUATION. YOU SHOULD
CONSULT WITH A SPECIALIST WHERE APPROPRIATE.
FURTHER, READERS SHOULD BE AWARE THAT
WEBSITES LISTED IN THIS WORK MAY HAVE
CHANGED OR DISAPPEARED BETWEEN WHEN THIS
WORK WAS WRITTEN AND WHEN IT IS READ.
NEITHER THE PUBLISHER NOR AUTHORS SHALL BE
LIABLE FOR ANY LOSS OF PROFIT OR ANY OTHER
COMMERCIAL DAMAGES, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO SPECIAL, INCIDENTAL,
CONSEQUENTIAL, OR OTHER DAMAGES.
For general information on our other products and
services, please contact our Customer Care Department
within the U.S. at 800-762-2974, outside the U.S. at 317-
572-3993, or fax 317-572-4002.
For technical support, please visit
www.wiley.com/techsupport.
Wiley also publishes its books in a variety of electronic
formats. Some content that appears in print may not be
available in electronic books.
Library of Congress Control Number: 2022939059
ISBN: 978-1-119-88332-6 (pbk); ISBN 978-1-119-88333-3
(ebk); ISBN 978-1-119-88334-0 (ebk)
Fantasy Football For
Dummies®
To view this book's Cheat Sheet,
simply go to www.dummies.com and
search for Fantasy Football For
Dummies Cheat Sheet” in the Search
box.
Table of Contents
Cover
Title Page
Copyright
Introduction
About This Book
Conventions Used in This Book
What You’re Not to Read
Foolish Assumptions
How This Book Is Organized
Icons Used in This Book
Where to Go from Here
Part 1: The Xs and Os of Fantasy Football: Just
the Basics, Please
Chapter 1: The Reality of Fantasy Football:
What’s It All About?
Understanding Fantasy Football: A Quick Overview
Recognizing That Fantasy Success Starts with the Draft
Drafting the Right Players for Your Roster
Your New Day Job: Managing Your Team Week by Week
Are You Ready to Play?
Chapter 2: Just Score, Baby: The Name of
the Fantasy Game
Scoring 101: Only the Basics
The Proof’s in the Points: Oﬀensive Fantasy Scoring
Shooting for Shutouts: Scoring with Defense
You versus Who? Knowing the Scoring Format
Chapter 3: Finding a League Right for You
Understanding Your League Options: Public or Private
Identifying Other Important Considerations
Picking Your League: The How-To
Starting Your Own League: You Want to Be a
Commissioner?
Chapter 4: Preparing for Your Fantasy Draft
Dissecting the Two Main Draft Types
Mastering Your Domain: Focus on League Rules and
Settings
Identifying and Preparing Your Draft Venue
Practicing with a Mock Draft
Joining a Practice League
Researching the NFL: The Real Key to Fantasy Success
Part 2: Advanced Scouting and Drafting Secrets
Chapter 5: Scouting Running Backs and
Quarterbacks
Running Backs: Riding the Workhorses of Fantasy Football
Quarterbacks: Counting on the Arms of the Field Generals
Chapter 6: Scouting Wide Receivers and
Tight Ends for Starters and FLEX
Eyeing the Go-To Guys: Wide Receivers
Blocking Bore or Big-Time Threat? Picking Tight Ends
Mr. Versatile: Consider the FLEX
Chapter 7: Scouting Kickers and Defenders
Nailing the Field Goals and Extra Points: The Kickers
Guarding the Gridiron: The Team Defenses
Chapter 8: Incorporating Important Draft
Strategies into Your Game
Why Strategy Is Important in Fantasy Drafts
Identifying the Most Popular Draft Strategies
Applying the Draft Strategies: Who to Pick and When
Manipulating Your Budget during a Salary Cap Draft
Chapter 9: Considering Other Draft Tactics
to Build a Winning Team
Avoiding Personal Biases
Drafting Your Stars’ Backups as Insurance Policies
Considering Rookies: Are the Top Rookies Worth Drafting?
Thinking Ahead to the Fantasy Playoﬀs
Part 3: Let the Games Begin: In-Season Strategy
Guide
Chapter 10: Setting Your Weekly Starting
Lineup
Why Reviewing Your Roster Is Vital
Reasons Why You May Need to Adjust Your Lineup
The How-To: Making the Actual Adjustments
Meeting Your Lineup Deadlines
Hitting the Film Room: Using Media to Your Advantage
Chapter 11: Acquiring Players via Free
Agency, Waivers, and Trades
Investigating Free Agency
Walking the Waiver Wire
All the Right Moves: Tips for Adding to Your Roster
Making a Trade Oﬀer: The Art of the Deal
Chapter 12: Finishing Strong: Down the
Stretch to the Fantasy Playoﬀs
Welcome to the Show: The Fantasy Football Playoﬀs
Aiming for the Playoﬀs: Ways to Improve Your Roster
Setting Your Playoﬀ Starting Lineup
Reaching the Big Kahuna: The Fantasy Title Game
Part 4: Daily Fantasy Football: A New Draft Every
Week
Chapter 13: Place Your Bets: Fantasy
Football Style
Legalized Gambling? Not Quite
Understanding What Makes Daily Fantasy Sports Diﬀerent
from Standard Fantasy Football
Using the Daily Fantasy Big Two: DraftKings and FanDuel
Getting Started
Bankroll Management
Gambling Responsibly
Chapter 14: Finding Your Game: Standard
Contest Types
Playing the Big Three Classic Contest Types
Using Strategies for Winning Cash Games: H2H or 50/50s
Guaranteed Prize Pool Tournaments: Big Payouts and
Bigger Challenges
Employing Draft Strategies for Winning GPPs
Other Popular Contests Worth Checking Out
Chapter 15: Virtual Salary Cap: Advanced
Play Strategies
Understanding Value
Controlling Exposure
Being Contrarian
Fading
Stacking
Employing Hedge Lineups
Chapter 16: Scoring the Right DFS Provider:
FanDuel versus DraftKings and More
Playing on DraftKings: A How-to Guide
FanDuel in the Sun: A How-to Guide
DraftKings versus FanDuel: Which Is the Victor?
Playing on Yahoo! Fantasy
Monkey Knife Fight: Fantasy for the Rest of Us
So Which Service Is for You?
Part 5: The Part of Tens
Chapter 17: Ten Quick Fixes to Make the
Day after Your Draft
Look for Bye-Week Problems
Replace Injured Players
Assess Your Team’s Strengths
Know Your Team’s Weaknesses
Swim in the Free Agent Pool
Trading from Surplus
Find Trading Partners
Know Your Opponents’ Rosters
Upgrade Your Kicker and Defense Positions
If It Isn’t Broken, Don’t Fix It
Chapter 18: Ten Rookie Mistakes to Avoid
Taking a Kicker Too Early
Drafting a Team DEF Too Early
Picking a QB Too Early
Selecting Players with the Same Bye Week
Ignoring the NFL Schedule
Trash Talking Too Much
Failing to Create or Neglecting Your Cheat Sheets
Ignoring Injury Updates
Missing the Draft Entirely
Believing the Fantasy Hype
Chapter 19: Ten Daily Fantasy Tips and
Tricks
Picking Your Provider
Knowing the Diﬀerences between Cash Games and
Tournaments
Your Bankroll Is Your Lifeblood
Drafting for the Moment
Understanding Value Is Key to Winning
Multi-entries Can Be a Powerful Multiplier
Stacking Is Your Friend
Guaranteed Contests Can Guarantee Profits
Gambling Responsibly
Watch Out for the Taxman!
Index
About the Author
Connect with Dummies
End User License Agreement
List of Tables
Chapter 1
TABLE 1-1 A Good Week for Your Fantasy Team
Chapter 4
TABLE 4-1 The Standard Snake Draft
TABLE 4-2 A Positional Cheat Sheet
List of Illustrations
Chapter 3
FIGURE 3-1: Victory on your mantel!
Chapter 4
FIGURE 4-1: A draft board tracks the picks during the draft.
Introduction
In 1999, I was exactly where you may be right now. I
decided to give the whole “fantasy football” thing a try,
even though I had no idea how to play.
Back then, the online version of the game was just
starting to take oﬀ, and Yahoo! had just begun oﬀering
its free league services. I did a bit of research and talked
to a few buddies about strategy, but I mainly learned the
game through trial and error(s). I had no definitive
resource guide to help me get oﬀ to a good start in my
fantasy football career.
Things have changed today. Since 2007, Fantasy Football
For Dummies has put helpful guidance and friendly
advice right at your fingertips — the keys to a successful
fantasy season, which I didn’t have when I began to play
the game. This resource can make your fantasy football
season less frustrating. You can avoid many mistakes and
start racking up victories by knowing the basics of the
game, the popular strategies for winning, and the
etiquette of league play.
Also, when I began playing, I knew very little about the
available online resources. I just bought the first fantasy
magazine I saw and went from there (and yes, printed
magazines still exist). This book also includes an
overview of major fantasy football providers and expert
websites that oﬀer tools and advice you can turn to when
looking to improve your team.
Now with this second edition, I’ve refined strategies and
updated the facts to match today’s NFL and fantasy rule
sets, including FLEX and PPR. I also cover the biggest
boom in fantasy football since the Internet: Daily Fantasy
Football. In an all new Part 4 of this book, I deep dive
into DraftKings, FanDuel and all things DFS involving
online prize money: It’s fast paced, exciting and you can
bet big to win big, but play at your own risk!
Fantasy football was built to mirror the best parts of pro
football and it does just that. Fantasy football is as
exciting and fun as it is frustrating and unpredictable.
Hope for the best and expect the worst!
About This Book
Fantasy Football For Dummies gives you the foundational
information you need to play fantasy football. This book
is a unique guide because it oﬀers in-depth lessons on
how to play the game and serves as a reference for
where to play and where to get great expert advice.
Unlike most fantasy websites and magazines, which oﬀer
advice with the assumption that you’re already a fantasy
addict, this book serves the beginning fantasy player
along with plenty of advice sprinkled throughout for
more advanced players. You can open this book, scan the
table of contents or index to find a subject that interests
you, and flip to those pages to improve certain parts of
your fantasy game or read from beginning to end to get
an understanding of the full spectrum of the fantasy
football world.
Conventions Used in This
Book
I provide the following basic conventions to help you
navigate your way through the concepts and discussions
in this book:
I italicize all new terms and follow them with easy-to-
understand definitions.
I boldface all keywords in bulleted lists and all steps
in numbered lists.
I use monofont to highlight all websites and email
addresses to set them apart from the normal text.
Most of the companies that provide fantasy football
games and content have websites of the same name.
For example, you can find Rotowire at www.rotowire.com.
If some web addresses break across two lines of text,
rest assured that I didn’t put in any extra characters
(such as hyphens) to indicate the breaks. So, when
using a web address that spans two lines of text, type
in exactly what you see, pretending as though the line
break doesn’t exist. For the fantasy websites, I also
capitalize all the links to help you easily identify them.
Although you can choose to play fantasy football on a
wide array of web providers, to simplify matters
throughout this book I use the default settings for
Yahoo!. No matter what provider you choose, make
sure you double-check the league settings before you
start to play.
Furthermore, because fantasy football is a game based
on the National Football League (NFL), it can feature
some confusing terminology. For example, each person
who plays fantasy football is a player in the fantasy
game, and they depend on the players in the NFL game.
See what I mean? Therefore, when I refer to coaches, I
mean you, the fantasy participant — unless I specifically
say “NFL coach.” Whenever I say player, I’m referring to
the NFL players who make up your fantasy league.
Finally, fantasy sites and experts use a lot of positional
shorthand based on NFL depth charts, and this book is
no diﬀerent. I call the starting running back the RB1,
and his backups are called RB2 and RB3. You can apply
the same shorthand when you’re the king of your own
team’s depth chart. Here are the positional abbreviations
to look for:
QB = Quarterback
RB = Running back
WR = Wide receiver
TE = Tight end
K = Kicker
DEF = Team defense
D/ST = Defense/Special teams
What You’re Not to Read
Throughout the book, there might be personal asides or
historical references to the crazy game we call fantasy
football. These anecdotes, which I often place in
sidebars, are not essential reading in order to grasp
fantasy football.
Foolish Assumptions
When writing this book, I made a couple of assumptions
about you, my dear reader. Here are my two main
assumptions:
You’re a football fan. I don’t explain how oﬀenses
can get a first down or when the forward pass was
invented. You know the pro league, and you know
many of the NFL stars by name. Understanding the
game helps you evaluate talent and choose quality
players during the fantasy draft process and during the
season. It’s possible to stick only to expert advice and
cheat sheets to play fantasy football, but I don’t advise
it. For a more in-depth look at the game and rules of
football, check out Football For Dummies, 6th Edition,
by Howie Long and John Czarnecki (Wiley).
You own (or have regular access to) a computer
or a smartphone and you’re not afraid to use it.
Almost all fantasy leagues are run exclusively online,
from the drafting process to weekly team
management. I assume that you can surf the web,
download an app and click on links. Being able to
navigate the Internet quickly and eﬀectively is part of
the game.
How This Book Is
Organized
Fantasy Football For Dummies explains the game to you
from start (the draft) to finish (the championship).
However, like the NFL, the fantasy season is never truly
over. You can use the research information to scout
players and potential sleepers year-round. This book is
organized so that you can jump in anywhere, depending
on your experience level and the status of your season
and league.
Part 1: The Xs and Os of Fantasy
Football: Just the Basics, Please
Part 1 provides readers with an overview of the game.
You find out how it works, how diﬀerent fantasy leagues
are set up and run, why scoring is so important in
fantasy football, and how you can join or create a league
that’s right for you. I also explain how you can prepare
for the most fun day on the fantasy calendar: the all-
important fantasy league draft.
Part 2: Advanced Scouting and
Drafting Secrets
Researching the NFL players and picking the best
possible talent for your fantasy team is a very important
aspect of fantasy football. This part provides guidelines
for you to use when you try to separate the wheat from
the chaﬀ at the diﬀerent roster positions. Then when
you’re ready for draft day, this part explains important
draft strategies to help you assemble your team.
Part 3: Let the Games Begin: In-
Season Strategy Guide
After you assemble your dream team in the draft (or
endure a nightmare brought on by another coach always
selecting your coveted players), you need to know how to
guide your team to glory during the fantasy season. This
part walks you through your many in-season
management duties and breaks down the most common
issues you’ll face and decisions you’ll have to make. If
you draft well and you make some shrewd moves during
the season, your team may qualify for your league’s
playoﬀs, and you may even win your league
championship! The fantasy postseason is its own beast,
so I end this part by explaining the rules and strategies
for enjoying postseason success.
Part 4: Daily Fantasy Football – A
New Draft Every Week
Fantasy football can be fun, but what happens when you
aren’t interested in playing through a whole season? Is
there a way to apply your fantasy football drafting skills
for one week, or even just one game? Yes. It’s called
Daily Fantasy Football. And it’s taking the NFL and
fantasy sports by storm.
Part 4 focuses on introducing you to this exciting recent
development in fantasy sports, by exploring the basics of
finding a DFS provider, setting up an account, and then
getting started entering tournaments and competitions.
Learn the diﬀerence between popular contest types,
from 50/50s to H2Hs to larger Guaranteed Prize Pool
tournaments worth hundreds of thousands of dollars!
Part 5: The Part of Tens
Part 5 is the classic For Dummies feature, the Part of
Tens. The chapters here are filled with quick reminders
that you can refer to before your draft and well into the
fantasy season. Specifically, I present ten quick fixes you
can make after your draft concludes and you determine
that your team is less than perfect. I also cover ten
common rookie mistakes you should avoid at any time
during your fantasy season. Finally, I oﬀer ten tricks and
tips to get winning in Daily Fantasy contests and
tournaments.
Icons Used in This Book
To help you navigate your way through this book, I
provide the following friendly and useful icons in the left
margin. These little pictures enhance your reading
pleasure and point out specific types of information.
This icon provides some fantasy football advice in
a nutshell. I give you specific actions or strategies
you can implement to improve your team or your
fantasy football gaming experience.
Here you find important advice worth repeating
and remembering. If you have time to only skim the
chapters I provide here, these are the bits of
information you should keep with you.
Most fantasy advice follows the “rule,” but there
are always “exceptions,” right? When I see a possible
contradiction or a path that could lead you to fantasy
failure or exile from the rest of your league mates, I
warn you about it. Consider this icon a yellow flag.
Where to Go from Here
Like all For Dummies titles, this is a reference book, and
each chapter is a modular piece about a specific area of
fantasy football. You can skip around and not get lost!
Flip to the table of contents or the index, find the
location of what you want to know, read what you want
to read, and feel free to skip the rest of the info.
If you’re totally new to the game, you can start your
reading with Part 1. If you know the game but want to
improve your skills as a fantasy coach, you may want to
focus on Parts 2 and 3. If you already had your league’s
draft, you may want to skip to Part 3, which discusses in-
season game management. If you are here to learn how
to master Daily Fantasy Sports play, then skip to Part 4!
From the day you first sign up for a fantasy league to the
day you hoist your league’s championship trophy over
your head to the day you sign up for another season, this
book will be your guide through the world of fantasy
football. No matter what you read, I wish you luck in
your future fantasy adventures.
Part 1
The Xs and Os of Fantasy
Football: Just the Basics,
Please
IN THIS PART …
If you’re new to the game of fantasy football, Part I has
you covered. Chapter 1 gives you the quick lowdown on
fantasy football. In Chapter 2, I explain how fantasy
points are scored and why scoring is so important to the
game. Chapter 3 covers the types of leagues available to
fantasy players and helps you determine which one to
join, if you aren’t already in one. Finally, Chapter 4 helps
prepare you for your fantasy draft so you can create a
fantasy team that would make NFL general managers
green with envy.
Chapter 1
The Reality of Fantasy
Football: What’s It All
About?
IN THIS CHAPTER
Focusing on fantasy football’s big picture
Getting up to speed on the draft process
Filling your roster with the right players
Reviewing the responsibilities of team
management
Starting your fantasy journey
Sports fans usually root only for their favorite local
teams, but fantasy sports allow the diehard sports fan to
root for every team. In fact, playing fantasy makes
watching every real game more fun and exciting.
Millions of online fantasy sports enthusiasts can’t be
wrong. The biggest of all the fantasy sports is fantasy
football, and after you start playing, you’ll quickly know
why. But before you start playing fantasy football, you
need to know the basics.
This chapter gives you a quick overview of fantasy
football. Consider this chapter your jumping oﬀ point
into fantasy football. If you already know how to play but
want to improve your game, feel free to skip to Chapter
4. However, if you keep reading, you may discover
something about fantasy football that you didn’t know!
This chapter focuses on season-long fantasy football
leagues, also known as ”standard” leagues. If you’re
looking to play “Daily Fantasy Football” or “DFS,” these
basics still apply, and the diﬀerences between the two is
explained in more detail in Part 4.
Understanding Fantasy
Football: A Quick Overview
What is fantasy football all about? Instead of just
watching the NFL game, fantasy football allows you to
feel like you’re part of the action by assembling an all-
star lineup of the best players in the league. Fantasy
allows you to imagine the fireworks of all those football
stars playing as one unit. In this section, I give you a
quick walkthrough of the basics of fantasy football so you
can get a better grasp of this popular activity you’re
considering playing.
How fantasy and the NFL diﬀer
When comparing fantasy and the NFL, two significant
diﬀerences stick out. In the NFL, all that matters is
which team wins or loses. In fantasy, however, NFL wins
and losses don’t count. Instead of team stats, fantasy
relies not only on scored touchdowns but also on
individual stats (such as yards gained) to calculate each
fantasy player’s performance based on a determined
league scoring system (see Chapter 2 for more on
scoring). The results are called fantasy points, and your
team’s fantasy point total is the sum of your starting
players’ eﬀorts. Your fantasy team will win or lose based
on those results. So, in a way, fantasy football and the
NFL both are about wins and losses that lead up to the
best teams battling in a playoﬀ format to decide a
champion (see Chapter 12).
The other major diﬀerence is that fantasy teams consist
of players from every team in the league, not just one
NFL team (see the “Drafting the Right Players for Your
Roster” section later in this chapter for a breakdown of a
fantasy team roster). Only the best players are drafted;
thus, each team is a sports fan’s fantasy. Everything else
in the game tries to reflect and simulate real football.
How to play fantasy football
So, you’ve decided that you want to play fantasy football.
Perhaps a buddy asked you to join a league, or maybe a
coworker started talking trash and bet that he could
easily beat you in a new league that he’s forming.
Perhaps you don’t know anyone who plays, but you’re
always hearing about fantasy football and you want to
join a public league to find out what the fuss is all about.
No matter your reasons for playing fantasy
football, you’re in for a fun-filled experience that’s
sure to get you hooked. I can guarantee that at
diﬀerent times, this game can make you cheer, drive
you nuts, and break your heart. The following list
gives you a snapshot of what happens in a fantasy
season:
1. You join a league.
You can join a public league, where anyone can sign
up for a spot, or a private league, where you need an
invitation to play. Some people play just for fun and
some play for serious coin. League selection is an
important factor, so don’t take it lightly. Chapter 3
discusses the diﬀerent kinds of leagues and what to
look for when signing up for one.
2. You prepare for your league draft by scouting
players.
Before choosing your fantasy team, you need to
research all the available players so you can pre-rank
them according to your personal preference. In
Chapters 5, 6, and 7, I tell you what I look for when
scouting the NFL so you can become your own expert.
3. You build your fantasy team via the draft.
The draft is the most fun and exciting day of the
fantasy season. During the draft, each fantasy coach
selects one NFL player at a time until the rosters are
complete. Chapter 4 explains how to prepare for
every type of draft and how the draft works. Chapters
8 and 9 oﬀer in-depth draft strategies to help you
outsmart your opponents and create a fantasy force.
4. Your team competes against another team every
week.
During the NFL season, the real teams face each
other and so do the fantasy teams in your league. The
players’ real-time stats are converted into fantasy
points by your league provider, and in the most
common head-to-head leagues, the fantasy team that
scores the most points wins the game for the week.
Points-based leagues work a little diﬀerently. Check
out Chapter 2 for a breakdown of how fantasy scoring
works.
5. You make moves to improve your team.
As a fantasy coach, you’re in total control. You can
drop players you think aren’t good enough and
replace them with free agents. If one of your starters
gets hurt, you can bench him and start a healthy
player instead. You may even make a trade oﬀer to
another coach. Chapters 10 and 11 explain how to
manage your team each week and how to adjust your
roster via player movement.
6. Your team (hopefully) makes the playoﬀs and
wins your league.
Only the strong survive, and at the end of the fantasy
season, the top teams square oﬀ in a tournament to
decide the league champion. Chapter 12 oﬀers some
strategic advice for managing your playoﬀ team and
presents a breakdown of the various playoﬀ formats.
The last team standing may win a trophy, a cash prize,
or just honor; but make no mistake, there will be only
one winner.
How scoring makes you a winner
Fantasy football simulates the real deal by using a
performance-based scoring system. A touchdown (TD) is
worth 6 points for an NFL team and 6 fantasy points for
a player on a fantasy team (for rushing or receiving
touchdowns. Many leagues count passing TDs for 4
points). Fantasy players are also awarded 0.5 or 1 point
per catch, points for yardage gained, such as 1 point for
every ten yards gained rushing or receiving. Bad NFL
plays often count as negative fantasy points;
interceptions and fumbles lost can be worth -1 to -2
points respectively. In general, every statistic can be
used to rate a player’s achievements, good and bad,
depending on your fantasy league.
Your fantasy team’s final score each week is the
sum of all your starting players’ fantasy points. Table
1-1 shows an example of fantasy scoring for one
week in a league with fractional and negative points.
Don’t worry about having to calculate all this each
week. Your league provider does the math for you.
For more specifics about scoring, check out Chapter
2.
TABLE 1-1 A Good Week for Your Fantasy
Team
Position Actual
Performance
Fantasy Points
Scored
Fantasy Point
Total
Quarterback
240 yds passing
2 touchdowns
1 interception
240 / 25 = 9.6
2 x 4 = 8
1 x -2 = -1
16.6
Wide receiver
110 yds receiving
6 receptions
1 touchdown
110 / 10 = 11
6 x 0.5 = 3 PPR
1 x 6 = 6
20
Wide receiver 85 yds receiving
3 receptions
85 / 10 = 8.5
3 x 0.5 = 1.5 PPR 10
Running back
140 yds rushing
35 yds receiving
2 receptions
3 touchdowns
140 / 10 = 14
35 / 10 = 3.5
2 x 0.5 = 1 PPR
3 x 6 = 18
36.5
Running back
80 yds rushing
75 yds receiving
4 receptions
1 touchdown
2 lost fumbles
80 / 10 = 8
75 / 10 = 7.5
4 x 0.5 = 2 PPR
1 x 6 = 6
2 x -2 = -4
19.5
Tight End
40 yds receiving
3 receptions
1 lost fumble
40 / 10 = 4
3 x 0.5 = 1.5 PPR
1 x -2 = -2
7.5
FLEX
(WR/RB/TE)
110 yds receiving
6 receptions
1 touchdown
110 x 10 = 11
6 x 0.5 = 3 PPR
6 x 1 = 6
20
Kicker 2 field goals
2 extra points
2 x 3 = 6
2 x 1 = 2 8
Position Actual
Performance
Fantasy Points
Scored
Fantasy Point
Total
Team defense
14 points allowed
2 sacks
1 fumble
recovered
1 interception
14 points = 1
2 x 1 = 2
1 x 2 = 2
1 x 2 = 2
7
TOTAL: 145.1
How important fantasy terms keep
you in the loop
Like the rest of the sports world, fantasy sports has a
lingo all its own. The slang terms are all fairly easy to
grasp and fun to use, so don’t be scared oﬀ! I include the
following list so you can get a good feel for these fantasy
football terms before you start playing, and I use them
repeatedly throughout the book:
Breakout: When a player goes from average to great.
Bye week: Every NFL team is inactive once during the
regular season; an NFL team’s oﬀ week is its bye
week.
Cheat sheets: The lists of pre-ranked players —
overall and by position; see Chapter 4.
Collusion: Two coaches working together to win a
league; see Chapter 11.
Daily Fantasy: An alternative to standard fantasy
football where you bet money on individual weeks or
games; see Part 4.
Damaged goods: When a player involved in a trade
is hurt; see Chapter 11.
Elite: The highest ranked players at their positions.